They said that you collected in 45 different states, is that correct?
Not books.
See what they found, how they come to these figures about the number of places I went.
I used to collect book plates
as well as brochures and library catalogs.
So do I, by the way.
That's a very legitimate collectible.
Book plates are wonderful.
Yeah.
I've got a John Quinn book plate.
John Quinn was a wonderful collector in 1922.
I collect catalogs of collectors, too, and sale catalogs and stuff.
There's a book called American College Book Plates that I had a copy, and I used to use that as a reference point.
You saw my book plate collection.
You're using it as evidence.
That's right, yeah.
Now, were those book plates removed from books that you had acquired, or were they a combination of books?
Some were out of collections of book plates that I'd acquired.
I had a book plate for the New York Public Library.
I've never been in the New York Public Library.
But they must have the New York Public Library checking desperately to see if the... Yeah, yeah.
I'm hoping, you know, when this is resolved, I'll assist them.
Will you?
Do you think you're going to tell them specifically how you did things, too?
They seem to be pretty much onto it in the evidence.
Quite a bit of it was done so long, though I'm sure they've done some remodeling, and there's institutions I haven't been in in 18 years, you know.
I'm sure that if I go back to certain places, the buildings, the structures might not even exist anymore, you know.
You know, if you had decided to be a regular professional thief, you could have been very, very... I would think you could have been very successful at it, I suppose.
Let me ask you a straight out question.
You don't have to answer it.
Do you consider yourself a thief?
Oh.
Knowing that I preserve the stuff that, yes, in a way that other unknowns to me who may have wanted access to the material missed out, that I feel bad about.
Although I've given people access to my stuff who otherwise would have never have known of it.
What do you mean like people like?
Dwayne Olsen and Billy Laquay and the old whino that I knew in Minneapolis.
See, I haven't been in Des Moines much, so you can't talk to these guys about the particulars of book collecting.
It's too bad you couldn't do an interview with me.
Maybe sometime you can do an interview of me in Minneapolis with my group of guys.
And you can go up to a guy like Adam and ask them about...
and you'll know what it is, you know, these technical terms.
At what point did you decide to elevate your collection?
Into printing and that?
Well, say from the general stacks into special collections.
When I ran out of material that I couldn't find in the general stacks.
And you also decided, apparently, to go beyond the printed book, but to manuscript material as well.
Oh, just a little bit.
I touched lightly on it.
But mainly it was the printed book, then?
Yeah.
Well, no, mainly it was architecture and views of areas and American history.
Well, what was the pertinence then of the Nuremberg Chronicle?
Well, yeah, about three years ago I got into printing.
I had over a hundred incunables.
That's quite an impressive assemblage in three years in the late 20th century, isn't it?
Yeah, you know what's happening, don't you?
I don't mean to be interrupted.
Well, he wants to know what we're laughing about, right?
No, no.
I think it's a nice thing that I got Steve here to talk to and everything because, I mean,
Like, I think it was a month and a half ago, I was beat up by four people in the game.
And, I mean, it's nice because Steve invited me down to his house for a while to see if I wanted to stay there for a while.
That thing's pulled out up in New Moines.
I mean, it's just nice to know that he's there if I need him.
That make you feel good when people talk about you like that?
Yeah, yeah.
I haven't known Adam that long in the way, trust me.
You ought to see how those boys in Minneapolis have known for ten, eight, ten years, you know.
in a sense they've you know they've had single parent homes like duane only has his father and i've been like a substitute you know i can't be a mother it's really nice that people that are older like steve kids know and be friends with younger people like myself and kevin
Well, you're getting to meet people from different areas, like Mr. Fasbini.
Here's from the East Coast.
I've spent a lot of time with these New Englanders and that there.
Did you ever get up to Maine?
A little bit.
I've got a friend that's a record collector in Brunswick.
I went, well, that's where Bowdoin is.
I went to Bates College up in Lewiston.
That's my college.
Oh, oh.
There's a college called Coldly College.
Coldly, well, the fellow that testified yesterday.
I never did make it up there, but.
Apparently, they've got a pretty good collection.
I've heard that, yeah.
Yeah.
But I went up to Bowdoin College because there was a man in Minneapolis who was a historical writer that worked for the old Minneapolis Times.
His name was Arthur J. Russell, and he donated his personal materials, but wasn't sold off.
This was at Bowdoin?
Yeah.
What's this?
This is to give you an idea how good a heart Jerry is.
She's known the trouble that I've had, I've went through, I've had a lot of education, and she got these tickets free to American Business Seminar, and she's sending her, me, and her oldest son to this seminar, hoping that we can take this knowledge and do something with it.
That's great, huh?
And these are valued at $125.
Wow, that's something, I see it, baby.
She's a nice woman.
And that's just the kind of people that I associate with.
Yeah, if I'd have lived in Des Moines, I'd have known these people for a while, you know.
I know people just like them in Minneapolis.
You have a sense of rightness to you.
You have a moral.
sense, a system of values.
You could talk a little bit to me about that.
I appreciate you thinking that.
Some people think I don't have it anymore.
I see these friends here, these people.
This is evidence.
This is very compelling, persuasive.
Yeah, I'm so happy that you can take the time and hear my side of it because everybody's heard the government's side of it.
And they're not going to get to hear yours.
Yeah, and that's
Mine is going to reach a lot more people.
Yeah, that's not... The government's version isn't moral.
It doesn't... I always was interested, for instance, in the Confederate States.
I had a Civil War collection of either Copperhead or pro-Confederate stuff because...
This is printed material?
Printed material, yeah.
Is this in the collection?
Yeah, I was especially interested in Van Every Horton.
He was the major copperhead publisher in New York City.
H-O-R-T-O-N?
Yeah, yeah.
Van Everett.
Is that the name?
Van Every.
E-V-E-R-I-E.
Because I felt, and you read post-Civil War accounts of the war,
there was a message and a lesson that was lost in the confederacy and uh while they preserved the union but the country never was the same afterwards and what we lost was the state's rights thing you know and the civil war even today is still a wound that hasn't been settled the the the southerners never
developed the cosmopolitan atmosphere of the northerners and their pride like in small southern towns are still the battles fought in those towns and the things done in that era that is what they identify with and we lost something in the Civil War and that's preserved in the memoirs and the accounts and the family
things that are passed down from generation to generation in, you know, verbally and so forth in the people of the South or the publications of the South.
They, for instance, there were a lot of slaves that when they were freed, they wanted to stay with their masters simply because that was their home.
Slavery, you know, there was a, I wished I could quote the Senate
version and all that, but it was debated and it was agreed upon that by 1885 the Southerners would free the slaves.
simply because they were finding it was uneconomical to have them.
H. L. Macon suggested that we shouldn't really, that the war wasn't necessary.
No, no, it wasn't.
Absolutely.
Because we were the last major country to get rid of slavery and world pressure would have been such that it would have been necessary.
And today we got the blacks have economic slavery to the government anyhow.
What are they, you know, what's happened to most of them now?
You know, they, it's just like Jerry talks about if you try to,
If you're on welfare and you try to sell something or you try to make a little extra money for yourself, they'll kick you off.
Most of the blacks today are slaves economically anyhow, but they don't have the personal identification they had back then.
Although the only thing that was bad about them is with the cruel, which was in the minority, and I base that on my readings of contemporary stuff,
some of them didn't have the freedom to get away from the cruel master, so to speak.
But a lot of them, they were part of the family, and they didn't want to.
And when they were freed, what happened at the South
Or did the North economically try to help them?
No, a lot of them just starved to death and died of disease.
They had no place to go.
And where did they stay?
They stayed in the South until, economically, during the wars, they could come north during World War I and World War II.
Because, by and large, the black, northern American Negro was an unknown phenomenon until World War II.
It was running down where we are.
Oskaloosa.
He was an Indian chief or something.
It's a nice name.
I used to have... Oh, you did, huh?
The nickname they call this, the 21st century nickname is Oski.
I'll show you an interesting building.
You know, there was an old Jewish
A group of people, our family immigrated over and they came way to Davenport and then went up to the Twin Cities in the late 19th century or mid 19th century.
And they came over with this group of German Jews that immigrated to Southeast Iowa.
And there was a very prominent member of that ethnic fraternity, religious fraternity here, his name was Frankel.
And he had a dry goods company and it's right in the next block on our right and it's called the Frankel block.
And I'll show you the Frankel block when we go by.
Now, you had mentioned to me that you have a distant relation to Dr. Rosenbach.
Yeah.
Well, you see the Frankel block, right?
There's stained glass transoms.
Oh, yeah.
And he was a Jewish merchant here in southeast Iowa.
Which must have been pretty unusual.
Yeah, yeah.
With stained glass transoms.
Yeah.
Are they nice?
Yeah, they're pretty nice.
They were built in the 1880s.
You want to eat in Bill and Surf's Cafe there?
That's a good mom, pa, and a nice old lady in there that'll cook for you and say hi to you.
And I used to eat there before my demise.
I hope it's open.
Uh-oh.
Yeah, it's open.
Come on in.
We'll get something to eat.
It's a lot more wholesome than... Okay, we'll shut down now.
No one ever knowing about what you actually had.
Specifically, the ultimate thing would be, it's not the whole sentence.
I suppose the ultimate thing would be, for me, would be if I could somehow repair the mistrust through my bad judgment I've created in the academic community.
And then to get recognition of the potential
that I could contribute and to be able, let's say, to have open access to various depositories of knowledge that myself I could learn and I could take people like Adam in if they get curious on something that they could learn.
You know?
Because I had, you know, it was funny, in school I either got excellent grades or
failing grades, and most of it was due to the attitude of the teacher.
I, for instance, got an F in American history in the 10th grade, and I didn't know what I'd do now, but I knew and was interested in American history, but I had a personality clash with the teacher.
Well, Adam here has the same problem at school.
Adam has interests in things that I think the way to teach is to bring out somebody's
Interest if they have a latent interest in something and work on that in context to everything else you see And sometimes educators in a public sense seem to overlook that and they if they seem to have a problem communicating or whatever they just shuck off the difficult Like myself and Adam see I identify myself with Adam because I was sort of in his
spot as a youth, you know.
But I put myself into collecting and preserving things, and that sort of became my life, and I don't know what else life to be, you know.
Can you imagine these people like that?
They're people in all economic stratas that
If they just could find somebody that knew, like there's probably somebody in this town that would like to know the history of that Frankl block.
And maybe nobody in Oskaloosa even knows.
about it you know but maybe out there there's somebody that want to know about it sure yeah and i've done this all over the country i can tell you about amarillo texas all along these routes i used to take that someday we ought to take a trip together
Say again, you can never betray a trust.
I can never betray a trust.
If, for instance, I were given a couch and the keys to the Library of Congress, I'd go around and make sure all the windows were locked and lock the door after I left.
I probably, if I were entrusted,
to the Library of Congress.
Everybody walked out and said, Steve, you can live here.
And I were given that position of trust.
I'd probably find more purses that had been left by patrons and get them returned than otherwise would be.
When somebody gives you their trust, then you can't betray them.
I never could.
I didn't fall over that lie.
You know what I'm reading?
You know.
Once you personally accept an extension of trust, you respect it.
Yeah, if they'd like to say, they gave me the keys to the Library of Congress and said, you can live here.
you have an apartment here yeah would you do that if they said it yeah i'd probably make notes on things and say hey you can inventory this better do that better i couldn't
I mean, a lot of librarians, all they do is just check books out.
I mean, they don't have the knowledge to do that.
Right here, honey.
They tell you to go look in the index file, you know.
Mm-hmm.
They tell you to walk over and pull the book right out and say, here you go.
Did you know where all your books were in the house?
Yeah.
Did you know where you could put your hands on them?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
They were talking about the Charles T. Wells collection in Hartford.
I imagine he was Hartford's premier.
Hartford, Connecticut.
I imagine he was Hartford's premier of Biblophile of the late 90s.
How was it?
Had an exceptional collection of books.
Americana.
I think he bought most of it from Todd and Meade.
They were early.
Yeah.
Well, they had an antiquarian book department there.
Facilities.
Robert Clark.
That's the antiquarian collector and publisher in Cincinnati.
That's the name.
He was Cincinnati.
He and Peter Thompson, who wrote the bibliography of Ohio back in 1883, they were Cincinnati's premier bibliophiles and writers of the 19th century.
As far as book collecting and republishing American history, Daniel Drake was probably... Daniel Drake and Charles Sisk were probably Cincinnati's foremost...
You know a guy I always liked was Nicholas Longworth from Cincinnati.
Nicholas Longworth, L-O-N-G-W-O-R-T-H.
He, in about 1850 or just before the Civil War, was Cincinnati's wealthiest citizen.
He owned all of Mount Adams, which is part of downtown Cincinnati now.
and a lot of things around there.
You know how he made his money?
He made it buying land, of course, and in grape culture.
In fact, he perfected the process of breeding the Catawba grape.
He had grape barbers and a winery in Cincinnati.
Well, you know, there was a story about Longworth.
I read an old, old book, and it was his views of the poor.
of what poor people one and longworth sort of dressed in old raggedy clothes one day he was asleep next to a rock sitting uh you know next to a bush or something he had his hat off he was sleeping with his head on this rock and somebody who didn't know who he was came and put a penny in his hat
and somebody who knew who he was saw it so when mr longworth awoke now this is the wealthiest man in cincinnati in 1850. when nichols longworth awoke the man said you know you've done you could do a lot of good for people here in cincinnati and latin he said how can you take charity
from somebody.
Aren't you ashamed of yourself for that?
Of course, he didn't solicit the charity.
Why don't you spruce yourself up and live according to your means?
And why do you help some of the people you do like prostitutes or people that they thought were disreputable?
And Longworth said, well, a widow with children and that
You'll find sympathy through anybody, but I try to help out the people nobody else likes or people have contempt for, because he'd give sums of money to individuals that people in this town would think would be disreputable.
They'd say, well, why don't you give it to the church or give it to this?
He had his own way of thinking, I wouldn't like to have met that guy.
How do you develop this stuff?
Well, my home life was very uncomfortable and very unsettling.
I lived in an exclusive neighborhood and went for a while to private school.
St.
Thomas Military Academy in St.
Paul, for instance.
Did you graduate from that?
No.
No, I ran away.
But I wasn't accepted by my own group for what I was, and when I'd get into the city, I started out collecting the Salvation Army.
I had these people in these neighborhoods, and they accepted me.
And then in reform school, when I went to reform school, I wasn't beaten up in reform school because I was a small, rich kid.
I got on with those guys.
I had all kinds of friends before I'm screening.
In fact, during adolescence, that was my first group of peers, people my own age that were my friends.
And what were you even responsible for?
For not going to school or running away from home because my mother was so terrible and mean and my home life was so bad.
Were you abused in any way, physically?
Of course, she used to burn my stuff, and she was worse to my father.
She used to burn his clothes and stuff, but she'd say the most insulting, rottenest, meanest things.
I feel sorry for her now, her rage.
Is she alive?
Yeah, she's alive, but she's broken.
You know, she just sort of became aid up with her aggression, you know, so.
So I, you know, I'd leave home or leave school and wander around in the vacant houses in the urban and rural areas in the Salvation Army and pick up stuff and pick up with the people in the area.
I always had a few bucks, you know.
That's why you say that I feel threatened.
Not really.
I lived in the worst neighborhoods in Minneapolis, yet people wouldn't bother me.
They knew I was good people.
That wasn't my question.
When I asked about that, it was when you were in the libraries.
Stephen, you ever think you'd want to be a teacher?
Yeah, I would, but I don't know.
I wouldn't want to just sit in the classroom.
I like, you know, your best lessons
are seeing it.
I've taken guys... This is very interesting.
Isn't that neat, that Italian ink?
It really is, yeah.
And you know, look at that.
That looks like a St.
Paul art glass company window with a beveled diamond in the center.
Oh, it's beautiful, isn't it, huh?
You know, your Victorian architecture varies from region to region in the country.
Like, the New England stuff has a different feel than the stuff in Iowa.
Look at that one with the arches.
And, well, back to the teaching thing, yeah, I would, but I kind of would like to be a teacher like Socrates.
He just went around and taught as he observed, you know.
That's the ultimate.
Instructed.
Yeah, instructed.
Sort of like a field trip teacher.
Yeah.
I took, like, a couple of guys.
Oh, they're a little older than that.
Look at that garden.
That's a beautiful little house there, isn't it?
I'd like to teach people your knowledge, and then also, while you're learning,
you know, get, feel the excitement of their learning.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Well, I can learn from them, you know, like if I took you two guys to Minneapolis, I'd ask you, what do you see?
Because I've seen it all my life.
We'd give you a different view, and it would give you a whole different view.
I took a young fellow from Ottumwa up there, and we got over the hill, and he'd never been in the city.
And all of a sudden, the interstate got about eight lanes wide, and there were
all this traffic, you know, big city traffic, and he was just, like, scared and all that, and I had another fellow with me who was from Minneapolis, and we got to 494 and 35W, or in the Crosstown area, and there's a big office park development in there, and the skyline of skyscrapers there is as big as Des Moines, you know, there's 34, 40-story office buildings in the South Town Office Plaza, you know, and there's a lot of buildings,
So I says to this Carl Thrasher, I said, Carl, Minneapolis is a big city, isn't it?
I says, look at how big those buildings are there.
And he says, yeah, that's almost as big as downtown Des Moines.
And I says, we're still five miles out, you know.
And he just, the things he would say about the city, the way the houses were, the way the people were, the traffic and that,
He mentioned things.
I never thought of it that way.
I just had seen that all my life.
So I learned from his observations.
Things I didn't realize.
You're a young man.
You're 42.
Five years younger than I am.
However this thing comes out, you're going to still be a young man when it's all over.
Regardless.
You've still got a lot of your life left.
How do you think you'd like to spend it?
Gosh, I don't know.
I'd like to do what I was doing, you know?
I'll be a little more specific.
Oh, traveling and buying and selling antiques, but yet I put in a lot of work in a way.
I hate being just a merchant.
See, when I'd sell these architectural things to people, I wouldn't
I always enjoy selling it to somebody redoing an old home or whatever because I could see it go in use, like sash locks.
I would just love a guy redoing an old house that would come in and want his house authentic down even to the sash handles.
I used to save those, you know, down to the minute.
Now, is it true that somewhere in the neighborhood of 50,000 doorknob?
Yeah, I belong to the National Doorknob Collectors Club, and I
uh most of the major collections in the country i've sort of contributed stuff to and i've known i knew the founders and i was in on it from the beginning what is the significance of the doorknob well i think its major significance is to preserve beyond its function exactly well to preserve its its function really is a club and to compare each other's no i mean beyond the function i'm talking just fundamentally about the doorknob
Not the club.
Oh, the significance of the doorknobs?
Yeah.
Well, they were an art form.
They have all these beautiful patterns.
And like they used to do courthouses, and the architects would put the city seal in it or the state seal.
And years ago, you could have a building you're building with your, even the knob custom made with your initial in it.
And that all went out.
by the time of World War I or the Depression.
So what is the focus in terms of the periods of the collection?
Give me the years.
Well, okay, the first emblematic knob was designed by Cruxinger and was made in Boston by the Metallic Compression Casting Company.
And it was a patented process of pressing up.
figure in brass or casting it and molding it.
And that was done by Krutzinger, designed by Krutzinger and patented by the Metallica Press and Casting Company in 1869.
So it starts from 1869 to about 1920.
That was it.
Would you say you had one of the most extensive and comprehensive collections in the United States?
Yeah, I did.
Would you say the most or one of the most?
Well, it's up to debate.
Charlie Wardell, for instance, had more store door handles.
And who's Charlie Wardell?
Another major collector.
Does he know you?
Oh, very well.
And where is he out of?
High Point, North Carolina.
Lee and Jim Kaiser had a more extensive collection of pressed glass knobs.
His collection was stronger than that.
But I suppose in the brass decorative knobs.
A quad-county grain ink.
These are big silos, right?
Yeah.
They worked for Des Moines Lock for approximately almost a year.
And they, the city had brought down.
Thanks, Steve.
Look at that.
Years ago, they had more of that, more of the shops, more of the personal identification.
But your craftsman... Oh, yeah, looks like a chandelier or decanter.
Yeah, that's kind of crystal.
That's my crystal.
I've had it for...
Right now, for six years, given to me from a friend.
And after he gave it to me, he didn't realize what it was he wanted it back.
And I said, well, he gave it to me.
It's mine now, and I've had it ever since.
This is a beautiful country.
Yeah, it's a neat country.
And I can find some distant admirers.
Silos and the folks that are there.
Yeah.
Could you say you were an obsessive collector?
Oh, I collected in a lot of fields, and I really couldn't do enough in each field.
I should have done more with doorknobs, or more with windows, or more with books.
I could see my limitations, and maybe I could have missed out on other aspects of life that were given.
different rewards or different satisfactions to myself or other people.
But some people say I am, but I don't.
I enjoyed collecting.
And it was a livelihood.
Who gets to have their work and their livelihood be their enjoyment?
How extensive was your stained glass window?
Oh, I had about 500 windows.
And I was trying to categorize them by examples of studios around the country.
That'd be another good project.
I worked with a guy named H. Webb Wilson, who's an art class dealer out on the East Coast and a consultant to the
Smithsonian on American art glass.
There's very little research that's been done on American art glass studios of the 19th century.
They haven't been chronicled, or their designs, or their artisans, or their glasswork hasn't really been chronicled or exhibited very much.
And he's the only guy I know that's done any research on that.
And I had been doing that, too.
And he wrote a book on it.
It's the only book that I know it's ever written.
As far as being obsessive, I wasn't thought to be by the people in the fields.
Like, Wilson didn't think I was obsessive with our class.
Kaiser didn't think I was obsessive with doorknobs.
Book people didn't think I was with books, but they never could understand the other aspects of collecting.
They'd say, what do you say?
Doorknobs.
I think everybody I know, everybody I've interviewed for this project,
It's obsessed.
Oh, yeah.
We're collectors, you know.
I think we, quite frankly, cheerfully admitted as part of our fabric.
You know, I mean, Ray Cornell said yesterday,
When they started showing at Nuremberg Chronicle, I got physically excited.
I mean, I really did.
I said, oh, it's wonderful.
And I started asking questions about the binding.
Apparently, it's the original embossed path binding.
That's the original binding, which is quite extraordinary.
What's that?
The Nuremberg Chronicle.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
That's an original binding.
I don't think it is.
I think it's 18th century.
Yeah, it just doesn't look like a 500-year-old binding.
No, no.
I was astonished when she said she thought it was... I don't think it is.
It's a very good binding of this period, but it is... And the clasps, you know, kind of... And the tooling, it's later, I think.
Yeah, it just didn't look... I mean, I've seen 500-year-old bindings that don't hold up that well.
Yeah.
That's on paper, too.
That's not, I mean, that's a paper text.
It's not a vellum text.
No, it's vellum.
It is vellum.
Yeah, it's vellum.
Very well preserved.
There's a little foxing on it, though.
On the pages?
Well, the pages are paper, but... That's what I meant, yeah.
Oh, I thought you meant the cover itself.
She said, I asked her if... No, no.
Oh, the book wasn't printed on vellum.
The book is printed on paper because it was foxing.
The binding, I thought, was vellum.
It is, yeah.
And she said, it's not vellum.
It's calfskin.
I asked the woman.
No, it's vellum.
It's white.
Calfskin is.
I said, I went up to her after her testimony, and I asked her some questions about the book.
Yeah.
And she said, oh, no, it's not vellum.
It's embossed calfskin.
Calfskin peels.
It gets like that red.
raw thin.
It'll leave something on your hand unless it's oiled, where Bellum will split.
And that thing, you can just feel it.
It looked like Bellum to me.
I was astonished that she would have said there was something to do.
Well, so much for your experts and professionals.
What would you say were your most prized possessions in the book collection?
What did you enjoy owning most?
Well, my Victorian trade catalogs and my view books on American cities.
View books?
Yeah.
For the sake of my type, it's V-I-E-W.
And then I suppose I did like those.
Well, I suppose my regional histories, because I could read them and get things out.
And then I suppose for the
books themselves the incunables and how did you enjoy them did you take them down and well i i looked at i enjoyed sharing them with guys like adam and explaining what uh uh what it was now who did you have down here in it somewhere to give me an instance of somebody you might bring in and how they would enjoy the collection with you oh david olson
or Billy Lockway, or Norman Crowe.
He's an antique dealer.
There were a lot of people, or quite a number of people in Ottumwa, that saw the books.
I didn't make any effort to conceal them from anybody.
I didn't want people coming in the house when I wasn't there, like bribing Mr. Hall and buying them off of them.
You know, say, oh, I'll give you 50 bucks for this.
Steve won't know.
I didn't want people there when I wasn't there.
Do you think any of that ever happened?
I think it did with Ken Rhodes, yeah.
I think he let FBI agents in there to go through that stuff before the search warrant, and they may very well have stolen some things out of there.
I can't prove that, but I think he let people in there.
Because I read the search warrant.
They knew pretty much what was in there when they wrote up that search warrant.
I think you're absolutely right on that.
What's your general feeling?
How do you feel?
About what?
About everything.
Well, I'm pretty scared.
Everything's scared, but I'm optimistic.
I've met guys like you, you know.
Yeah, there will be sympathetic and knowledgeable people at all, and he has countless notoriety.
Do you appreciate, of course, that, you know, there isn't another case quite like this?
There isn't.
I mean, on the scale.
In terms of what you accomplished, I think, is in a class by itself.
It's quite extraordinary.
He must know that.
He must feel that.
Oh, there was Cardinal Richelieu in France.
That's right.
And... Henry IV.
Yeah, I didn't know about that.
And Madame Pompadour.
In fact, they started the law.
They introduced a law that every publisher had to give the king.
One of the books.
That's why they'd have to buy them.
They got one every one free.
Yeah.
No, I mean people that were...
Berleining books.
The Bibliothèque Nationale in France was started, or endowed in a major capacity by what the Cardinal Richard was.
And he would sort of, when he got caught, he was sort of admonished by the royalty.
Finally, they just gave up.
I think they made him a librarian of it, didn't they?
Just to get him to stop.
It left?
Yeah, I read that somewhere.
I've got to check that out.
When I met Steve, the first thing I asked him, what was it that you collected?
He was talking about the architectural books, and he was saying how he'd have people come in that wanted to restore something, and they had no idea what it looked like back then, so they could bring it back to its natural beauty.
and how that made him happy to know that the people that he gave that knowledge to could go out with that and be able to restore those old buildings and go back to their natural behavior.
Did you get a set of those 12 volumes that they presented, the FBI did?
The 12 volumes, I guess they itemized.
There were 12 volumes that they presented in the court yesterday or the day before.
It was a 12-volume catalog, essentially, a computerized catalog of the books that they removed from a tumble... No, I would like to get a set of those.
Well, I would, too.
I should.
I was wondering, I mean, yeah, that's the catalog of your... Yeah, I should.
Well, wouldn't you think so?
I mean, I'm desperate to get a set of them.
Well, they're not giving me anything.
In fact, that's another thing.
I've got to go over all the books that they've attributed to the other places.
I've got a set from...
Last summer.
And, well, it's going to be on the record now.
Harvard University is getting USC's first edition of Uncle Tom's Cabin.
How did that happen?
Well, somebody screwed up.
And I found a number of disparities in that.
You know that it's USC's.
Yeah, he's nodding his head yes.
So I got to go over it all.
Yeah.
I'm really the only one that can straighten this out.
What they find out.
What makes you so sure that?
Well, only by this catalog.
I'd have to show you.
Nickerson's got the catalog.
How many Uncle Toms did you have?
Maybe there were two.
No, I had one and a partial of another one.
I've got one.
Is this the two volume?
It's the two volume, 1852 Boston.
It's got to have that point of the title.
Yeah, I know about those.
Is that right? So that actually belongs? Well um you see they have a list of items verified, and then they have a total master list, and then the items verified of the July list. That's USC, also... When this is over, all right, do you mind if I tell this to somebody? If you don't want me to I won't. I don't want to betray your confidence in any way but after there's a verdict? Okay? Well I'd have to
double check it and see that's in July but there there's some people. I would just say that there's a possibility it would be good if you checked it again, something like that. Well they haven't given me any additional updated stuff to check. How many of these instances of things like this did you see? Oh I'd have to look at the book in case there were multiple copies but four or five instances of that a major rarity is going to the wrong institution
You can't think of any other roughhands.
Well, I can, but I'll maybe.
Come on, come on for me.
No, I'll wait.
I need some bargaining chips, you know.
I agree with you.
I want to, it'd be nice if they'd make me serve my term as community service or something where I could.
Just help them out with it.
Yeah.
I hate having,
sitting around with guys in the Polk County Jail talking about Point's Uncle Tom's cabin.
They'll listen and they'll learn, but there are better places to... That knowledge can be used more productively.
Yeah.
You might... I'm going to shut this up.
...back with the academic community.
This is kind of what I was asking in a roundabout way.
I mean, when I said that this case is really in a class by itself.
But that isn't the major factor to get my...
Standing back in the academic community, that's a selfish motive.
I owe it to them.
At this point, I've screwed up.
I could have collected doorknobs or stuff out of buildings being torn out.
What would you like to say to the academic community?
I'm at a loss for words, really.
I don't know what to say.
I mean, how did you feel yesterday when you saw this process?
Oh, I felt terrible personally for those people.
When I seen it,
From a person to person.
When I looked those people in the face, I was ashamed.
Really?
Did any of them look at you in the eyes?
Did you establish eye contact?
Yeah, some, but most of them were afraid to look at me.
I didn't want to have anybody afraid of me.
How about Magoo?
Oh, I wanted to shake his hand, and he wouldn't.
You might have known the similarities.
He looked a lot like you.
I was amazed.
Go ahead.
The similarities and what the consequences were to him personally, he looked like he'd been agonized, because he'd been bum-wrapped.
I would have never done that to him, you know?
But I didn't deliver any.
I found the damn thing.
Was this more like the military people call a target of opportunity?
I mean, it was just something that presented itself.
Just as I was walking by a public area, it was laying on a counter.
Really?
Yeah.
That did enable you to enter the next level of collectible, didn't it?
Is that right?
Yeah.
And I guess the thing that got me in the best was when I go in and talk to librarians and these restricted things, they would automatically assume I was who I was by the knowledge that I had, you know.
Were you ever turned down?
No, I never was.
Never was.
Were the methods as described by the various witnesses, were they essentially correct ways that you did manage to gain access?
Pretty much, but most of it wasn't a matter of poor security.
It was a matter of opportunity.
Some of it security, but...
I mean, did things go out the windows the way they described it?
Well, I don't know.
I could go through any institution, and if one way wasn't amenable, I could find three or four other ways.
Wow.
And you never get scared while you were doing this?
No, for instance, why don't we keep this off the record?
I'm sorry, you said you're pretty ingenious of resources.
Now, the machine's on.
I'm not going to deceive you.
Well, I'm ingenious with resources, you know.
Tell me about, what were you going to say about that institution, that Ivy League institution?
Well, I may need that as a marketing head in the future.
And I almost have to go there.
One time I almost got killed in a book dump wader crawling up that to get to the... What was this?
Out in California.
Wait, do you remember that?
Well... Okay.
Tell me what happened.
Well, I was crawling up to get to the closed stacks, and they turned the wader on, and I jumped off, and I got caught in that machinery and dragged up and... Really?
...run through that.
I'd have been crushed.
That's not funny.
No.
But, uh...
Such is the passion in the chase, you know, for the rare tone.
I'm sorry to laugh.
Did you ever want to tell people about this?
Oh, yeah, I did.
It's kind of a modern day Indiana Jones.
Maybe someday I can give a lecture at the Roxborough Club or something.
On the book collecting.
The Groyer Club.
The Groyer Club, yeah.
Daniel Fearing had a book exhibit there in 1917 or 1912 or something.
Is that right?
Well, Scheide, I was telling you about it the other day, had an exhibit there last year, which I went to.
Oh, he did?
Oh.
And that's how I met Scheide.
Yeah.
and then he invited me out to his collection of Princeton.
The home of Carl Thrasher.
Who's Carl Thrasher?
Well, Carl was one of my... Carl was the only other individual that I met.
Now, don't tell anybody this.
This guy was abused and was a bee...
Excuse me.
Don't put this in the people.
No, I won't.
They'll pick him up.
Okay.
I don't even have his name.
You met another guy.
Okay.
This young man was the only other book thief I met in my whole career.
I moved into Ottumwa, and he got to be friends with me.
He was a teenager.
He was into American history.
And he was as knowledgeable about American Indians as we are about books, believe it or not.
Even though he was kicked out of school and a problem with people, he was really, you know, it was a tragic thing.
But anyhow, he'd been nailing the Ottumwa Public Library for their Indian books.
And here I was trying to hide this collection, and I found out, and I says to Carl, I says,
You've got to quit doing this.
Here, this place had been, you know, I didn't get any books.
If you tell me a public library, you're losing all kinds of books.
And here I am sitting here.
So I befriended him and, uh... Don't forget, I need a roll of film.
Oh, okay.
Any kind of drug store or something.
Any convenience store.
Oh, okay.
I'll take you downtown.
But anyhow, I showed him my book collection and got him interested in
Antiquarian books.
I said, Carl, stop taking books out of the Ottumwa Public Library.
If you ever need books, you tell me what you need.
There are plenty of Antiquarian bookstores.
He didn't want old books.
He just wanted the information.
He said, I'm different than you, Steve.
I just want the information.
I said, there are plenty of stores in Minneapolis you can buy that, not here in Ottumwa.
I'll buy you any book you want.
That's right.
Don't take them out of the Ottumwa Public Library.
Did he stop?
I believe he did, yeah.
But now they're blaming me for those books.
But I don't want to see anything happen to them, and I just feel so bad.
I tried, through the schools, to get, I knew an ex-faculty member at the Otoma High School, to get people interested in
in his knowledge of Indian stuff.
Because if you got the kid talking on Indian stuff and somebody could inspire him, they could get him into his other schoolwork and get him to learn.
Because they were saying, oh, don't hang around with him.
He's a troublemaker and he's a bad boy.
And he was a good kid.
He come from a terrible home.
His dad stole him from his mother when he was eight months old.
And he lived alone with his father.
And his father beat him since he was really young.
He used to come over to my house crying and drunk.
And he was just an emotional wreck from the terrible home life.
And all he had was his books and his Indian thing that he was interested in.
And the way I got in with him is I brought Billy Laquay down, who's an Indian also.
And the two of them got to be friends.
And there aren't very many Native Americans here in Ottumwa.
as much blood as he was, he was almost, you know, three quarters and bellies full.
So through, see, I lived in the Native American part of Minneapolis.
They got a ghetto that's like that.
And through that, I got to be friends with him.
And then we had this book thing in common.
So he was my closest friend in Ottumwa.
Well, I am not interested in that at all, so I wouldn't even worry about it.
Oh, no, no, I just don't want him in trouble, that's all.
Okay, come on.
Look at all these guys.
Yeah.
Do you know of this book thing together here, me and this young fella, you know?
He's the only other book thief I ever met.
Well, he certainly didn't operate at your level.
Oh, no, no, no, it didn't.
Of course you are sophistication.
No.
You know what I told them?
They had the weirdest crime column in this town.
One time I read that an old lady was arrested in the Hy-Vee for stealing cans of tuna fish.
It was in the paper.
Then another time,
A couple of high school girls were arrested for taking sunflower seeds and peanuts down at the drugstore.
And I said, Carl, if I ever get in trouble, they're going to put me right in the October newspaper crime column with the tuna fish thief.
Well, I guess I wound up with that.
Never, Steve.
Don't forget his film.
No, I won't.
I do have a roll, but I think I might want to shoot one of 24 shots.
Yeah.
He's making this house instead of things.
Yeah, I'm going to take you up there.
You said Kyle had a chance, this individual had a chance to see incunabular.
Yeah.
You said he goes with a drollier binding.
Vellum.
That's funny.
Yeah.
He lives in a shack, doesn't he?
Poor fella.
That's his house up there?
And they rent that, yeah.
And he's got books in there, right?
Don't tell anybody.
No.
I don't want any trouble.
I don't want him to get in a tape.
That's small stuff, yeah.
Maybe we can help him when I get out of this.
I'm gonna run up here.
You can get some... Yeah, I gotta get some gas and I'll get some gas.
Okay, why don't I go across the street and do that while you're doing this?
There.
Alrighty.
Okay.
I'll put the gas in for you.
Here it is.
I bought it for $16,000.
Isn't this a fine old place?
Biblioteca Blumberg.
Blumberg.
Look at how the kids have been breaking up my 60 Cadillac limousines.
Oh, they even got the car door open.
Now the cops got the keys to those.
Those run.
Land of the cops?
Yep.
Oh, Jesus Christ.
Isn't that a shame?
Man, that's terrible.
I'm sorry.
I'm going to leave the newspaper here.
They took that a few days ago.
Where is this?
Out of the court.
Oh, this one?
That is a nice picture.
Look at this.
When was that in the paper?
Well, Nick's a reporter and he knows what Rhodes is like.
Tell him what happened to your savings, life savings, Mr. Hall.
Oh yeah, he stole a down bomb.